Brief Compilation of Open-Source Text Generation ecosystem blog post (#1296)
huggingface/blog: os-llms.md

---
title: "Open-Source Text Generation & LLM Ecosystem at Hugging Face"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/os_llms/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: merve
---

<h1>Open-Source Text Generation & LLM Ecosystem at Hugging Face</h1>

<!-- {blog_metadata} -->
<!-- {authors} -->

> Text generation and conversational technologies have been around for ages. Earlier challenges in working with these technologies were controlling both the coherence and diversity of the text through inference parameters and discriminative biases. More coherent outputs were less creative and closer to the original training data and sounded less human. Recent developments overcame these challenges, and user-friendly UIs enabled everyone to try these models out. Services like ChatGPT have recently put the spotlight on powerful models like GPT-4 and caused an explosion of open-source alternatives like LLaMA to go mainstream. We think these technologies will be around for a long time and become more and more integrated into everyday products. 

Reviewer: One of the best intros from recent times. Killed it!

This post is divided into the following sections:
1. Brief background on text generation
2. Types of text generation models
3. Licenses

> 4. Tools in Hugging Face Ecosystem

Author: I changed section names and linked only headers with second level

> 4. Tools in Hugging Face Ecosystem

Reviewer 2: I don't see links here

## Brief Background on Text Generation

> Text generation models are essentially trained with the objective of completing an incomplete text or generating text from scratch as a response to a given instruction or question. Models that complete incomplete text are called Causal Language Models, and famous examples are GPT-3 by OpenAI and LLaMa by Meta AI. 

Reviewer 3: nit: I believe it's LLaMA

![Causal LM Output](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/text_generation.png)

Causal language models are adapted using a process called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). This optimization is mainly made over how natural and coherent the text sounds rather than the validity of the answer. Explaining how RLHF works is outside the scope of this blog post, but you can find more information about this process [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/rlhf).

> One concept you need to know before we move on is fine-tuning. This is the process of taking a very large model and transferring the knowledge contained in this base model to the use case: a downstream task. These tasks can come in the form of instructions. As the model size grows, the models can generalize better to the instructions that do not exist in the pre-training data.

Author: Changed this.

For example, the base model GPT-3 is a causal language model, and the models in the backend of the ChatGPT (which is the UI for GPT-series models) are fine-tuned on prompts that can consist of conversations or instructions through RLHF. It’s an important distinction to make between these models. 

> On Hugging Face Hub, you can find both causal language models and causal language models fine-tuned on instruction (which we’ll give links to later in this blog post). LLaMA is one of the first open-source LLMs to outperform closed-source ones. A research group led by Together has created a reproduction of LLaMA's dataset, called Red Pajama, and trained LLMs and instruction fine-tuned models on it. You can read more about it [here](https://www.together.xyz/blog/redpajama) and find [the model checkpoints on Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=togethercomputer%2Fredpajama). By the time this blog post is written, three of the largest causal language models with open-source licenses are [MPT-30B by MosaicML](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b), [XGen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-base) and [Falcon by TII UAE](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b), available completely open on Hugging Face Hub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Hugging Face Hub, you can find both causal language models and causal language models fine-tuned on instructions (which we’ll give links to later in this blog post). LLaMA is one of the first open-source LLMs to have outperformed/matched closed-source ones. A research group led by Together has created a reproduction of LLaMA's dataset, called Red Pajama, and trained LLMs and instruction fine-tuned models on it. You can read more about it [here](https://www.together.xyz/blog/redpajama) and find [the model checkpoints on Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=togethercomputer%2Fredpajama). By the time this blog post is written, three of the largest causal language models with open-source licenses are [MPT-30B by MosaicML](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b), [XGen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-base) and [Falcon by TII UAE](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b), available completely open on Hugging Face Hub.
```

Reviewer: Maybe also link Together, LLaMA?

> The second type of text generation model is commonly referred to as the text-to-text generation model. These models are trained on text pairs, which can be questions and answers or instructions and responses. The most popular ones are T5 and BART (which, as of now, aren’t state-of-the-art). Google has recently released the FLAN-T5 series of models. FLAN is a recent technique developed for instruction fine-tuning, and FLAN-T5 is essentially T5 fine-tuned using FLAN. As of now, the FLAN-T5 series of models are state-of-the-art and open-source, available on [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?search=google/flan). Note that these are different from instruction-tuned causal language models, although the input-output format might seem similar. Below you can see an illustration of how these models work.

Reviewer: Maybe also mention FLAN UL2? It's also an open-source model from Google. But I would understand if you'd rather not include it since UL2 has a different pre-training objective (mixture of denoisers).

- [Falcon 40B](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b)
- [XGen](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b)
- [MPT-30B](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b)
- [Pythia-12B](https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI/pythia-12b)
- [RedPajama-INCITE-7B](https://huggingface.co/togethercomputer/RedPajama-INCITE-7B-Base)
- [OpenAssistant](https://huggingface.co/OpenAssistant/falcon-40b-sft-mix-1226)

There are two code generation models, [StarCoder by BigCode](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=bigcode%2Fstarcoder) and [Codegen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=salesforce%2Fcodegen). There are model checkpoints in different sizes and open-source licenses for both, except for [Codegen fine-tuned on instruction](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/codegen25-7b-instruct).
 
The Hugging Face Hub also hosts various models fine-tuned for instruction or chat use. They come in various styles and sizes depending on your needs.

> [MPT-30B-Chat](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-chat), by Mosaic ML, uses the CC-BY-NC-SA license, which does not allow commercial use. However, [MPT-30B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct) uses CC-BY-SA 3.0, which can be used commercially. [Falcon-40B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b-instruct) and  [Falcon-7B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct) both use the Apache 2.0 license, so commercial use is also permitted. Another popular model is OpenAssistant, built on Meta's LLaMA model using a custom instruction-tuning dataset. Since the original LLaMA model can only be used for research, the OpenAssistant checkpoints built on LLaMA don’t have full open-source licenses. However, there are OpenAssistant models built on open-source models like [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/falcon) or [pythia](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/pythia) that use permissive licenses. [StarChat Beta](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceH4/starchat-beta) is the instruction fine-tuned version of StarCoder, and has BigCode Open RAIL-M v1 license, which allows commercial use. Finally, the instruction-tuned [XGen model](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-inst) only allows research use.

Reviewer: Can we bulletify this? Reads a bit dense.

> If you're looking to fine-tune a model on an existing instruction dataset, you need to know how a dataset was compiled. Some of the existing instruction datasets are either crowd-sourced or use outputs of existing models (e.g., the models behind ChatGPT). ALPACA dataset created by Stanford is created through the outputs of models behind ChatGPT, which OpenAI prohibits using for training models. Moreover, there are various crowd-sourced instruction datasets with open-source licenses, like [oasst1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenAssistant/oasst1) (created by thousands of people voluntarily!) or [databricks/databricks-dolly-15k](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k). If you'd like to create a dataset yourself, you can check out [the dataset card of Dolly](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k#sources) on how to create an instruction dataset. Models fine-tuned on these datasets can be distributed. 

Reviewer: Maybe also link ALPACA?

You can find a comprehensive table of all open-source models below. 

> | Model                                                                                    | Dataset                                                                                                                                                                                           | License            | Use                     |

Reviewer 2: Love this!

Recently, a Docker template for HuggingChat was released for Hugging Face Spaces. This allows anyone to deploy their own instance based on a large language model with only a few clicks.

![HuggingChat Space](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/docker_chat.png)

### How to find the best model?

Hugging Face hosts an LLM leaderboard [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard). This leaderboard is created by evaluating community-submitted models on text generation benchmarks on Hugging Face’s clusters. If you can’t find the language or domain you’re looking for, you can filter them [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation&sort=downloads).

![Open LLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/LLM_leaderboard.png)

You can also check out [LLM Performance leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/optimum/llm-perf-leaderboard) which aims to evaluate the latency and throughput of large language models available on Hugging Face Hub.

### Models created with love by Hugging Face with BigScience and BigCode

> Hugging Face has co-led two science initiatives, BigScience and BigCode. As a result of them, two large models were created, [BLOOM](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom) 🌸 and [StarCoder](https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starcoder) 🌟. StarCoder is a causal language model trained on code from GitHub (with 80+ programming languages 🤯). It’s not fine-tuned on instructions, and thus, it serves more as a coding assistant to complete a given code, e.g., translate Python to C++, explain concepts (what’s recursion), or act as a terminal. You can try all of the StarCoder checkpoints [in this application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-playground). It also comes with a [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=HuggingFace.huggingface-vscode).

Reviewer: Maybe introduce BLOOM first to respect the order? 

Also, it could make sense to clarify that Starcoder was trained on the FIM task, which is not exactly next token prediction.

Author: Thanks for the heads up, clarified this.

BLOOM is a causal language model trained on 46 languages and 13 programming languages. It is the first open-source model to have more parameters than GPT-3. You can find available checkpoints in [BLOOM documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/bloom).

## Parameter Efficient Fine Tuning (PEFT)

If you’d like to fine-tune one of the existing large models on your own instruction dataset, it is nearly impossible to do so on consumer hardware and later deploy them (since the instruction models are the same size as the original checkpoints that are used for fine-tuning). [PEFT](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index) is a library that allows you to do parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques. This means that rather than training the whole model, you can train a very small number of additional parameters, enabling much faster training with very little performance degradation. With PEFT, you can do low-rank adaptation (LoRA), prefix tuning, prompt tuning, and p-tuning.

You can check out further resources for more information on text generation.

**Further Resources**

> - AWS has released TGI-based LLM deployment deep learning containers called LLM Inference Containers. Read about them [here](https://aws.amazon.com/tr/blogs/machine-learning/announcing-the-launch-of-new-hugging-face-llm-inference-containers-on-amazon-sagemaker/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Together with AWS we released TGI-based LLM deployment deep learning containers called LLM Inference Containers. Read about them [here](https://aws.amazon.com/tr/blogs/machine-learning/announcing-the-launch-of-new-hugging-face-llm-inference-containers-on-amazon-sagemaker/).
```

On Hugging Face Hub, you can find both causal language models and causal language models fine-tuned on instructions (which we’ll give links to later in this blog post). LLaMA is one of the first open-source LLMs to have outperformed/matched closed-source ones. A research group led by Together has created a reproduction of LLaMA's dataset, called Red Pajama, and trained LLMs and instruction fine-tuned models on it. You can read more about it [here](https://www.together.xyz/blog/redpajama) and find [the model checkpoints on Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=togethercomputer%2Fredpajama). By the time this blog post is written, three of the largest causal language models with open-source licenses are [MPT-30B by MosaicML](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b), [XGen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-base) and [Falcon by TII UAE](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b), available completely open on Hugging Face Hub.

> The second type of text generation model is commonly referred to as the text-to-text generation model. These models are trained on text pairs, which can be questions and answers or instructions and responses. The most popular ones are T5 and BART (which, as of now, aren’t state-of-the-art). Google has recently released the FLAN-T5 series of models. FLAN is a recent technique developed for instruction fine-tuning, and FLAN-T5 is essentially T5 fine-tuned using FLAN. As of now, the FLAN-T5 series of models are state-of-the-art and open-source, available on [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?search=google/flan). Note that these are different from instruction-tuned causal language models, although the input-output format might seem similar. Below you can see an illustration of how these models work.

Reviewer 5: are we sure we want to present both text-generation and text-to-text-generation? (given we "one day" want to merge both)

Author: We can edit later on. It's better/easier for people to find what they're looking for today this way.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/1296#discussion_r1259441376 

I understand the point of view of the UI, maybe we can explain that for legacy reasons we have both, but in terms of blog post content, I would not make a strong distinction between both as the target audience might get confused

Author: (same response as the other one) the main distinction is one completes incomplete text meanwhile other one doesn't do that. Maybe people are looking for something like BART and not Falcon. I think it's a good distinction to make regardless of the pipeline changes. It's as main as a difference between a CLM and instruction fine-tuned CLM.

![FLAN-T5 Illustration](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/flan_t5.png)

> Having more variation of open-source text generation models enables companies to keep privacy with their data, ability to adapt models to their domains quicker, and cut costs for inference instead of relying on closed paid APIs. All open-source causal language models on Hugging Face Hub can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation), and text-to-text generation models can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text2text-generation&sort=trending).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Having more variation of open-source text generation models enables companies to keep their data private, to adapt models to their domains faster, and to cut costs for inference instead of relying on closed paid APIs. All open-source causal language models on Hugging Face Hub can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation), and text-to-text generation models can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text2text-generation&sort=trending).
```

> ### Models created with love by Hugging Face with BigScience and BigCode

Reviewer 6: emoji? ❤️

Author: Done!

Hugging Face has co-led two science initiatives, BigScience and BigCode. As a result of them, two large language models were created, [BLOOM](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom) 🌸 and [StarCoder](https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starcoder) 🌟. 

> BLOOM is a causal language model trained on 46 languages and 13 programming languages. It is the first open-source model to have more parameters than GPT-3. You can find available checkpoints in [BLOOM documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/bloom).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
BLOOM is a causal language model trained on 46 languages and 13 programming languages. It is the first open-source model to have more parameters than GPT-3. You can find all the available checkpoints in the [BLOOM documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/bloom).
```

Snippets to use all models mentioned in this blog post are given in either the model repository or the documentation page of that model type in Hugging Face.

## Licensing

Many text generation models are either closed-source or the license limits commercial use. Fortunately, open-source alternatives are starting to appear and being embraced by the community as building blocks for further development, fine-tuning, or integration with other projects. Below you can find a list of some of the large causal language models with fully open-source licenses:

- [Falcon 40B](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b)
- [XGen](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b)
- [MPT-30B](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b)
- [Pythia-12B](https://huggingface.co/EleutherAI/pythia-12b)
- [RedPajama-INCITE-7B](https://huggingface.co/togethercomputer/RedPajama-INCITE-7B-Base)

> - [OpenAssistant](https://huggingface.co/OpenAssistant/falcon-40b-sft-mix-1226)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- [OpenAssistant (Falcon variant)](https://huggingface.co/OpenAssistant/falcon-40b-sft-mix-1226)
```

(just to avoid confusion with the original OpenAssistant)

> There are two code generation models, [StarCoder by BigCode](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=bigcode%2Fstarcoder) and [Codegen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=salesforce%2Fcodegen). There are model checkpoints in different sizes and open-source licenses for both, except for [Codegen fine-tuned on instruction](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/codegen25-7b-instruct).

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
There are two code generation models, [StarCoder by BigCode](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=bigcode%2Fstarcoder) and [Codegen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=salesforce%2Fcodegen). There are model checkpoints in different sizes and open-source or [open RAIL](https://huggingface.co/blog/open_rail) licenses for both, except for [Codegen fine-tuned on instruction](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/codegen25-7b-instruct).
```

We're going to make some open-source people very mad if we say that RAIL licenses are open-source :)

 
The Hugging Face Hub also hosts various models fine-tuned for instruction or chat use. They come in various styles and sizes depending on your needs.

> [MPT-30B-Chat](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-chat), by Mosaic ML, uses the CC-BY-NC-SA license, which does not allow commercial use. However, [MPT-30B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct) uses CC-BY-SA 3.0, which can be used commercially. [Falcon-40B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b-instruct) and  [Falcon-7B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct) both use the Apache 2.0 license, so commercial use is also permitted. Another popular model is OpenAssistant, built on Meta's LLaMA model using a custom instruction-tuning dataset. Since the original LLaMA model can only be used for research, the OpenAssistant checkpoints built on LLaMA don’t have full open-source licenses. However, there are OpenAssistant models built on open-source models like [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/falcon) or [pythia](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/pythia) that use permissive licenses. [StarChat Beta](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceH4/starchat-beta) is the instruction fine-tuned version of StarCoder, and has BigCode Open RAIL-M v1 license, which allows commercial use. Finally, the instruction-tuned [XGen model](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-inst) only allows research use.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[MPT-30B-Chat](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-chat), by Mosaic ML, uses the CC-BY-NC-SA license, which does not allow commercial use. However, [MPT-30B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct) uses CC-BY-SA 3.0, which can be used commercially. [Falcon-40B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b-instruct) and  [Falcon-7B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct) both use the Apache 2.0 license, so commercial use is also permitted. Another popular family of models is OpenAssistant, some of which are built on Meta's LLaMA model using a custom instruction-tuning dataset. Since the original LLaMA model can only be used for research, the OpenAssistant checkpoints built on LLaMA don’t have full open-source licenses. However, there are OpenAssistant models built on open-source models like [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/falcon) or [pythia](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/pythia) that use permissive licenses. [StarChat Beta](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceH4/starchat-beta) is the instruction fine-tuned version of StarCoder, and has BigCode Open RAIL-M v1 license, which allows commercial use. Finally, the instruction-tuned [XGen model](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-inst) only allows research use.
```

> If you're looking to fine-tune a model on an existing instruction dataset, you need to know how a dataset was compiled. Some of the existing instruction datasets are either crowd-sourced or use outputs of existing models (e.g., the models behind ChatGPT). [ALPACA](https://crfm.stanford.edu/2023/03/13/alpaca.html) dataset created by Stanford is created through the outputs of models behind ChatGPT, which OpenAI prohibits using for training models. Moreover, there are various crowd-sourced instruction datasets with open-source licenses, like [oasst1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenAssistant/oasst1) (created by thousands of people voluntarily!) or [databricks/databricks-dolly-15k](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k). If you'd like to create a dataset yourself, you can check out [the dataset card of Dolly](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k#sources) on how to create an instruction dataset. Models fine-tuned on these datasets can be distributed. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
If you're looking to fine-tune a model on an existing instruction dataset, you need to know how a dataset was compiled. Some of the existing instruction datasets are either crowd-sourced or use outputs of existing models (e.g., the models behind ChatGPT). [ALPACA](https://crfm.stanford.edu/2023/03/13/alpaca.html) dataset created by Stanford is created through the outputs of models behind ChatGPT. Moreover, there are various crowd-sourced instruction datasets with open-source licenses, like [oasst1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenAssistant/oasst1) (created by thousands of people voluntarily!) or [databricks/databricks-dolly-15k](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k). If you'd like to create a dataset yourself, you can check out [the dataset card of Dolly](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k#sources) on how to create an instruction dataset. Models fine-tuned on these datasets can be distributed. 
```

Author: I'll commit the suggestion, but isn't this the case? Some models can't have commercial license simply because they are trained on datasets generated with text-davinci-003.

| [MPT-30B Instruct](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct)                     | [duorc](https://huggingface.co/datasets/duorc), [competition_math](https://huggingface.co/datasets/competition_math), [dolly_hhrlhf](https://huggingface.co/datasets/mosaicml/dolly_hhrlhf)       | CC-By-SA-3.0       | Instruction             |
| [Falcon 40B Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b-instruct)                 | [baize](https://github.com/project-baize/baize-chatbot)                                                                                                                                           | Apache-2.0         | Instruction             |
| [Dolly v2](https://huggingface.co/databricks/dolly-v2-12b)                               | [Dolly](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k)                                                                                                                          | MIT                | Text Generation         |

> | [StarCoder Beta](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceH4/starchat-beta)                     | [OpenAssistant Guanaco](https://huggingface.co/datasets/timdettmers/openassistant-guanaco)                                                                                                        | BigCode OpenRAIL-M | Code Instruction        |

Reviewer 8: turbo not :)

```suggestion
| [StarChat-β](https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceH4/starchat-beta)                     | [OpenAssistant Guanaco](https://huggingface.co/datasets/timdettmers/openassistant-guanaco)                                                                                                        | BigCode OpenRAIL-M | Code Instruction        |
```

> ## Tools in Hugging Face Ecosystem for LLM Serving

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## Tools in the Hugging Face Ecosystem for LLM Serving
```

### Text Generation Inference

> Response time and latency for concurrent users are a big challenge for serving these large models. To tackle this problem, Hugging Face has released [text-generation-inference](https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference) (TGI), an open-source serving solution for large language models built on Rust, Python, and gRPc. TGI is integrated into inference solutions of Hugging Face, [Inference Endpoints](https://huggingface.co/inference-endpoints), and [Inference API](https://huggingface.co/inference-api), so you can directly create an endpoint with optimized inference with few clicks, or simply send a request to Hugging Face's Inference API to benefit from it, instead of integrating TGI to your own platform. 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Response time and latency for concurrent users are a big challenge for serving these large models. To tackle this problem, Hugging Face has released [text-generation-inference](https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference) (TGI), an open-source serving solution for large language models built on Rust, Python, and gRPc. TGI is integrated into inference solutions of Hugging Face, [Inference Endpoints](https://huggingface.co/inference-endpoints), and [Inference API](https://huggingface.co/inference-api), so you can directly create an endpoint with optimized inference with few clicks, or simply send a request to Hugging Face's Inference API to benefit from it, instead of integrating TGI to your platform. 
```

![Screenshot from HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/huggingchat_ui.png)

> TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/), Hugging Face's open-source chat UI for LLMs. This service currently uses OpenAssistant as the backend model. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat and enable the search feature for validated responses. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui), and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/), Hugging Face's open-source chat UI for LLMs. This service currently uses one of OpenAssistant's models as the backend model. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat and enable the Web search feature for responses that use elements from current Web pages. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui), and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat. 
```

![HuggingChat Search](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/huggingchat_web.png)

> Recently, a Docker template for HuggingChat was released for Hugging Face Spaces. This allows anyone to deploy their own instance based on a large language model with only a few clicks and customize it. You can create your large language model instance [here](https://huggingface.co/new-space?template=huggingchat/chat-ui-template).

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Recently, a Docker template for HuggingChat was released for Hugging Face Spaces. This allows anyone to deploy their instance based on a large language model with only a few clicks and customize it. You can create your large language model instance [here](https://huggingface.co/new-space?template=huggingchat/chat-ui-template).
```

![HuggingChat Space](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/docker_chat.png)

### How to find the best model?

> Hugging Face hosts an LLM leaderboard [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard). This leaderboard is created by evaluating community-submitted models on text generation benchmarks on Hugging Face’s clusters. If you can’t find the language or domain you’re looking for, you can filter them [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation&sort=downloads).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Hugging Face hosts an [LLM leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard). This leaderboard is created by evaluating community-submitted models on text generation benchmarks on Hugging Face’s clusters. If you can’t find the language or domain you’re looking for, you can filter them [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation&sort=downloads).
```

![Open LLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/LLM_leaderboard.png)

> You can also check out [LLM Performance leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/optimum/llm-perf-leaderboard) which aims to evaluate the latency and throughput of large language models available on Hugging Face Hub.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
You can also check out the [LLM Performance leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/optimum/llm-perf-leaderboard), which aims to evaluate the latency and throughput of large language models available on Hugging Face Hub.
```

## Parameter Efficient Fine Tuning (PEFT)

> If you’d like to fine-tune one of the existing large models on your own instruction dataset, it is nearly impossible to do so on consumer hardware and later deploy them (since the instruction models are the same size as the original checkpoints that are used for fine-tuning). [PEFT](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index) is a library that allows you to do parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques. This means that rather than training the whole model, you can train a very small number of additional parameters, enabling much faster training with very little performance degradation. With PEFT, you can do low-rank adaptation (LoRA), prefix tuning, prompt tuning, and p-tuning.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
If you’d like to fine-tune one of the existing large models on your instruction dataset, it is nearly impossible to do so on consumer hardware and later deploy them (since the instruction models are the same size as the original checkpoints that are used for fine-tuning). [PEFT](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index) is a library that allows you to do parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques. This means that rather than training the whole model, you can train a very small number of additional parameters, enabling much faster training with very little performance degradation. With PEFT, you can do low-rank adaptation (LoRA), prefix tuning, prompt tuning, and p-tuning.
```

You can check out further resources for more information on text generation.

**Further Resources**
- Together with AWS we released TGI-based LLM deployment deep learning containers called LLM Inference Containers. Read about them [here](https://aws.amazon.com/tr/blogs/machine-learning/announcing-the-launch-of-new-hugging-face-llm-inference-containers-on-amazon-sagemaker/).
- [Text Generation task page](https://huggingface.co/tasks/text-generation) to find out more about the task itself.
- PEFT announcement [blog post](https://huggingface.co/blog/peft).

> - Read about how Inference Endpoints utilizes TGI [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/inference-endpoints-llm).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Read about how Inference Endpoints use TGI [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/inference-endpoints-llm).
```

---
title: "Open-Source Text Generation & LLM Ecosystem at Hugging Face"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/os_llms/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: merve
---

<h1>Open-Source Text Generation & LLM Ecosystem at Hugging Face</h1>

<!-- {blog_metadata} -->
<!-- {authors} -->

Text generation and conversational technologies have been around for ages. Earlier challenges in working with these technologies were controlling both the coherence and diversity of the text through inference parameters and discriminative biases. More coherent outputs were less creative and closer to the original training data and sounded less human. Recent developments overcame these challenges, and user-friendly UIs enabled everyone to try these models out. Services like ChatGPT have recently put the spotlight on powerful models like GPT-4 and caused an explosion of open-source alternatives like LLaMA to go mainstream. We think these technologies will be around for a long time and become more and more integrated into everyday products. 

> This post is divided into the following sections:

Reviewer 2: These were not updated to links as mentioned in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/1296#discussion_r1262452029

One concept you need to know before we move on is fine-tuning. This is the process of taking a very large model and transferring the knowledge contained in this base model to another use case, which we call _a downstream task_. These tasks can come in the form of instructions. As the model size grows, it can generalize better to instructions that do not exist in the pre-training data, but were learned during fine-tuning.

Causal language models are adapted using a process called reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF). This optimization is mainly made over how natural and coherent the text sounds rather than the validity of the answer. Explaining how RLHF works is outside the scope of this blog post, but you can find more information about this process [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/rlhf).

For example, GPT-3 is a causal language _base_ model, while the models in the backend of ChatGPT (which is the UI for GPT-series models) are fine-tuned through RLHF on prompts that can consist of conversations or instructions. It’s an important distinction to make between these models. 

> On Hugging Face Hub, you can find both causal language models and causal language models fine-tuned on instructions (which we’ll give links to later in this blog post). LLaMA is one of the first open-source LLMs to have outperformed/matched closed-source ones. A research group led by Together has created a reproduction of LLaMA's dataset, called Red Pajama, and trained LLMs and instruction fine-tuned models on it. You can read more about it [here](https://www.together.xyz/blog/redpajama) and find [the model checkpoints on Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=togethercomputer%2Fredpajama). By the time this blog post is written, three of the largest causal language models with open-source licenses are [MPT-30B by MosaicML](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b), [XGen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-base) and [Falcon by TII UAE](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b), available completely open on Hugging Face Hub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the Hugging Face Hub, you can find both causal language models and causal language models fine-tuned on instructions (which we’ll give links to later in this blog post). LLaMA is one of the first open-source LLMs to have outperformed/matched closed-source ones. A research group led by Together has created a reproduction of LLaMA's dataset, called Red Pajama, and trained LLMs and instruction fine-tuned models on it. You can read more about it [here](https://www.together.xyz/blog/redpajama) and find [the model checkpoints on Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=togethercomputer%2Fredpajama). By the time this blog post is written, three of the largest causal language models with open-source licenses are [MPT-30B by MosaicML](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b), [XGen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-base) and [Falcon by TII UAE](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b), available completely open on Hugging Face Hub.
```

> The second type of text generation model is commonly referred to as the text-to-text generation model. These models are trained on text pairs, which can be questions and answers or instructions and responses. The most popular ones are T5 and BART (which, as of now, aren’t state-of-the-art). Google has recently released the FLAN-T5 series of models. FLAN is a recent technique developed for instruction fine-tuning, and FLAN-T5 is essentially T5 fine-tuned using FLAN. As of now, the FLAN-T5 series of models are state-of-the-art and open-source, available on [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?search=google/flan). Note that these are different from instruction-tuned causal language models, although the input-output format might seem similar. Below you can see an illustration of how these models work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The second type of text generation model is commonly referred to as the text-to-text generation model. These models are trained on text pairs, which can be questions and answers or instructions and responses. The most popular ones are T5 and BART (which, as of now, aren’t state-of-the-art). Google has recently released the FLAN-T5 series of models. FLAN is a recent technique developed for instruction fine-tuning, and FLAN-T5 is essentially T5 fine-tuned using FLAN. As of now, the FLAN-T5 series of models are state-of-the-art and open-source, available on the [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?search=google/flan). Note that these are different from instruction-tuned causal language models, although the input-output format might seem similar. Below you can see an illustration of how these models work.
```

Having more variation of open-source text generation models enables companies to keep their data private, to adapt models to their domains faster, and to cut costs for inference instead of relying on closed paid APIs. All open-source causal language models on Hugging Face Hub can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation), and text-to-text generation models can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text2text-generation&sort=trending).

### Models created with love by Hugging Face with BigScience and BigCode 💗

Hugging Face has co-led two science initiatives, BigScience and BigCode. As a result of them, two large language models were created, [BLOOM](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom) 🌸 and [StarCoder](https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starcoder) 🌟. 
BLOOM is a causal language model trained on 46 languages and 13 programming languages. It is the first open-source model to have more parameters than GPT-3. You can find all the available checkpoints in the [BLOOM documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/bloom).

> StarCoder is a language model trained on code from GitHub (with 80+ programming languages 🤯) with Fill-in-the-Middle objective. It’s not fine-tuned on instructions, and thus, it serves more as a coding assistant to complete a given code, e.g., translate Python to C++, explain concepts (what’s recursion), or act as a terminal. You can try all of the StarCoder checkpoints [in this application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-playground). It also comes with a [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=HuggingFace.huggingface-vscode).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

StarCoder is a language model trained on permissive code from GitHub (with 80+ programming languages 🤯) with a Fill-in-the-Middle objective. It’s not fine-tuned on instructions, and thus, it serves more as a coding assistant to complete a given code, e.g., translate Python to C++, explain concepts (what’s recursion), or act as a terminal. You can try all of the StarCoder checkpoints [in this application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-playground). It also comes with a [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=HuggingFace.huggingface-vscode).
```

## Brief Background on Text Generation

Text generation models are essentially trained with the objective of completing an incomplete text or generating text in the form of a response to a given instruction or question. Models that complete incomplete text are called Causal Language Models, and famous examples are GPT-3 by OpenAI and LLaMa by Meta AI. 

> ![Causal LM Output](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/text_generation.png)

Author: I swapped the image in the dataset repository with that one

Causal language models are optimized using a process called reinforcement learning from human feedback. This optimization is mainly made over how natural and coherent the text sounds rather than the validity of the answer. You can get more information about this process [here](https://huggingface.co/blog/rlhf). In this post, we will not go through the details of this.

> One thing you need to know before we move on is fine-tuning. This is the process of taking a very large model and transferring the knowledge contained in this model to the use case, a downstream task. These tasks can come in the form of instructions. As the model size grows, the models can generalize better to the instructions that do not exist in the fine-tuning data. The model GPT-3 itself is a causal language model, and the models in the backend of the ChatGPT (which is the UI for GPT-series models) are fine-tuned on prompts that can consist of conversations or instructions through RLHF. It’s an important distinction to make between these models. On Hugging Face Hub, you can find both causal language models and causal language models fine-tuned on instruction (which we’ll give links to later in this blog post). LLaMa is the first open-source large language model to outperform closed-source large language models. However, it's not completely open-source due to license restrictions. A researcher group led by Together has created a reproduction of LLaMa's dataset, called Red Pajama, and trained LLMs and instruction fine-tuned models on it. You can read more about it [here](https://www.together.xyz/blog/redpajama) and find [the model checkpoints on Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=togethercomputer%2Fredpajama). By the time this blog post is written, three of the largest causal language models with open-source licenses are [MPT-30B by MosaicML](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b), [XGen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-base) and [Falcon by TII UAE](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b), available completely open on Hugging Face Hub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One concept you need to know before we move on is fine-tuning. This is the process of taking a very large model and transferring the knowledge contained in this base model to the use case: a downstream task. These tasks can come in the form of instructions. As the model size grows, the models can generalize better to the instructions that do not exist in the pre-training data.

For example, the base model GPT-3 is a base causal language model, and the models in the backend of the ChatGPT (which is the UI for GPT-series models) are fine-tuned on prompts that can consist of conversations or instructions through RLHF. It’s an important distinction to make between these models. 

On Hugging Face Hub, you can find both causal language models and causal language models fine-tuned on instruction (which we’ll give links to later in this blog post). LLaMA is one of the first open-source LLMs to outperform closed-source ones. A research group led by Together has created a reproduction of LLaMA's dataset, called Red Pajama, and trained LLMs and instruction fine-tuned models on it. You can read more about it [here](https://www.together.xyz/blog/redpajama) and find [the model checkpoints on Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?sort=trending&search=togethercomputer%2Fredpajama). By the time this blog post is written, three of the largest causal language models with open-source licenses are [MPT-30B by MosaicML](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b), [XGen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-base) and [Falcon by TII UAE](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b), available completely open on Hugging Face Hub.
```

> The second type of text generation model is commonly referred to as the text-to-text generation model. These models are trained on text pairs, which can be questions and answers or instructions and responses. The most popular ones are T5 and BART (which, as of now, aren’t state-of-the-art). Google has recently released the FLAN-T5 series of models. FLAN is a recent technique developed for instruction fine-tuning, and FLAN-T5 is essentially T5 fine-tuned using FLAN. As of now, the FLAN-T5 series of models are state-of-the-art and open-source, available on [Hugging Face Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?search=google/flan). Below you can see an illustration of how these models work.

Reviewer 2: I thought we were trying to unify `text-to-text-generation` and `text-generation`. From a user perspective, maybe the difference between both types is not significant enough to make a distinction in this blog post.

Reviewer 2: Yes, but from a reader perspective, it might be confusing to have this distinction here

Author: the main distinction is one completes incomplete text meanwhile other one doesn't do that. Maybe people are looking for something like BART and not Falcon. I think it's a good distinction to make regardless of the pipeline changes.

> 

Reviewer 2: A table summarizing the two paragraphs above (e.g. with columns model, license, dataset, demo) would be very useful

Author: Just put one.

![FLAN-T5 Illustration](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/flan_t5.png)

Having more variation of open-source text generation models enables companies to keep privacy with their data, ability to adapt models to their domains quicker, and cut costs for inference instead of relying on closed paid APIs. All open-source causal language models on Hugging Face Hub can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation) and text-to-text generation models can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text2text-generation&sort=trending).

> Snippets to use these models are given in either the model repository, or the documentation page of that model type in Hugging Face.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Snippets to use these models are given in either the model repository or the documentation page of that model type in Hugging Face.
```

## Licensing

> Many text generation models are either closed-source or the license limits commercial use. Fortunately, open-source alternatives are starting to appear and being embraced by the community as building blocks for further development, fine-tuning, or integration with other projects. Some notable fully open-source models include [MPT-30B](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b) and [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b). They both are causal language models distributed with the permissive Apache 2.0 license that allows commercial use.

Reviewer 2: MPT and Falcon were already introduced in the previous section, so re-introducing them here is a bit strange. Maybe this part could be rewritten as well

The Hugging Face Hub also hosts various models fine-tuned for instruction or chat use. They come in various styles and sizes depending on your needs:

[MPT-30B-Chat](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-chat), by Mosaic ML, uses the CC-BY-NC-SA license, which does not allow commercial use. However, [MPT-30B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct) uses CC-BY-SA 3.0, which can be used commercially.

> [Falcon-40B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b-instruct) and  [Falcon-7B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct) both use the Apache 2.0 license, so commercial use is also permitted. Another popular model is OpenAssistant, built on Meta's LLaMa model using a custom instruction-tuning dataset. Since the original LLaMa model can only be used for research, the OpenAssistant checkpoints built on LLaMa don’t have full open-source licenses. However, there are OpenAssistant models built on open-source models like [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/falcon) or [pythia](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/pythia) that use permissive licenses.

Reviewer 2: Nit: LLaMa -> LLaMA

Finally, the instruction-tuned [XGen model](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-inst) only allows research use.

> If you're looking to fine-tune a model on an existing instruction dataset, you need to know how a dataset was compiled. Some of the existing instruction datasets are either crowd-sourced or use outputs of existing models (e.g., the models behind ChatGPT). ALPACA dataset created by Stanford is created through the outputs of models behind ChatGPT, which OpenAI prohibits using for training models. Moreover, there are various crowd-sourced instruction datasets with open-source licenses, like [oasst1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenAssistant/oasst1) (created by thousands of people voluntarily!) or [databricks/databricks-dolly-15k](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k). If you'd like to create a dataset yourself, you can check out [the dataset card of Dolly](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k#sources) on how to create an instruction dataset. Models fine-tuned on these datasets can be distributed. 

Reviewer 2: It might be good to have some of the code generation models as well such as starcoder

Author: Added them.

### How can you serve these models?

Response time and latency for concurrent users are a big challenge for serving these large models. To tackle this problem, Hugging Face has released [text-generation-inference](https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference) (TGI), an open-source serving solution for large language models built on Rust, Python, and gRPc. TGI is integrated into inference solutions of Hugging Face, [Inference Endpoints](https://huggingface.co/inference-endpoints), and [Inference API](https://huggingface.co/inference-api), so you can directly create an endpoint with optimized inference with few clicks, or simply send a request to Hugging Face's Inference API to benefit from it, instead of integrating TGI to your own platform. 

![Screenshot from HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/huggingchat_ui.png)

> TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/), Hugging FAce's chat UI for large language models. This service currently uses OpenAssistant as the backend model. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat, and enable the search feature for validated responses. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui), and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/), Hugging Face's open-source chat UI for LLMs. This service currently uses OpenAssistant as the backend model. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat and enable the search feature for validated responses. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui), and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat.
```

> TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/), Hugging FAce's chat UI for large language models. This service currently uses OpenAssistant as the backend model. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat, and enable the search feature for validated responses. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui), and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat.

Reviewer 2: Note: we just released space docker template for chat UI when creating a new space, so it might be a good idea to highlight here

Author: Added it too.

> TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/), Hugging FAce's chat UI for large language models. This service currently uses OpenAssistant as the backend model. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat, and enable the search feature for validated responses. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui), and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/), Hugging FAce's chat UI for large language models. This service currently uses OpenAssistant as the backend model. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat, and enable the search feature for validated responses. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui), and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat.

TGI also supports popular community apps such as [nat.dev](http://nat.dev/) and [Open Assistant](https://open-assistant.io/). TGI supports some of the most popular OS models (Falcon, LLaMA, StarCoder, GPT-NeoX, etc.) as well as optimizations such as token streaming, tensor parallelism, quantization, and security with safetensors.
```

![HuggingChat Search](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/huggingchat_web.png)

### How to find the best model?

> Hugging Face hosts an LLM leaderboard [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard). This leaderboard is created by people uploading models, and metrics that evaluate text generation tasks are calculated on Hugging Face’s clusters and later added to the leaderboard. If you can’t find the language or domain you’re looking for, you can filter them [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation&sort=downloads).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hugging Face hosts an LLM leaderboard [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard). This leaderboard is created by evaluating community-submitted models on text generation benchmarks on Hugging Face’s clusters. If you can’t find the language or domain you’re looking for, you can filter them [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation&sort=downloads).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe also share the performance leaderboard https://huggingface.co/spaces/optimum/llm-perf-leaderboard

![Open LLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/LLM_leaderboard.png)

### Models created with love by Hugging Face with BigScience and BigCode

> Hugging Face has led two science initiatives, BigScience and BigCode. As a result of them, two large models were created, [BLOOM](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom) 🌸 and [StarCoder](https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starcoder) 🌟. StarCoder is a causal language model trained on code from GitHub (with 80+ programming languages 🤯), it’s not fine-tuned on instructions, and thus, it serves more as a coding assistant to complete a given code, e.g., translate Python to C++, explain concepts (what’s recursion) or act as a terminal. You can try all of the StarCoder checkpoints [in this application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-playground). It also comes with a [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=HuggingFace.huggingface-vscode).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Hugging Face has co-led two science initiatives, BigScience and BigCode. As a result of them, two large models were created, [BLOOM](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom) 🌸 and [StarCoder](https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starcoder) 🌟. StarCoder is a causal language model trained on code from GitHub (with 80+ programming languages 🤯). It’s not fine-tuned on instructions, and thus, it serves more as a coding assistant to complete a given code, e.g., translate Python to C++, explain concepts (what’s recursion), or act as a terminal. You can try all of the StarCoder checkpoints [in this application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-playground). It also comes with a [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=HuggingFace.huggingface-vscode).
```

> Hugging Face has led two science initiatives, BigScience and BigCode. As a result of them, two large models were created, [BLOOM](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom) 🌸 and [StarCoder](https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starcoder) 🌟. StarCoder is a causal language model trained on code from GitHub (with 80+ programming languages 🤯), it’s not fine-tuned on instructions, and thus, it serves more as a coding assistant to complete a given code, e.g., translate Python to C++, explain concepts (what’s recursion) or act as a terminal. You can try all of the StarCoder checkpoints [in this application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-playground). It also comes with a [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=HuggingFace.huggingface-vscode).

Reviewer 2: Note that we now have instruct-tuned versions of starcoder

BLOOM is a causal language model trained on 46 languages and 13 programming languages. It is the first open-source model to have more parameters than GPT-3. You can find available checkpoints in [BLOOM documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/bloom).

### Parameter Efficient Fine Tuning (PEFT)

> If you’d like to fine-tune one of the existing large models on your own instruction dataset, it is nearly impossible to do so on consumer hardware and later deploy them (since the instruction models are the same size as the original checkpoints that are used for fine-tuning). [PEFT](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index) is a library that allows you to fine-tune smaller parts of the parameters for more efficiency. With PEFT, you can do low-rank adaptation (LoRA), prefix tuning, prompt tuning, and p-tuning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you’d like to fine-tune one of the existing large models on your own instruction dataset, it is nearly impossible to do so on consumer hardware and later deploy them (since the instruction models are the same size as the original checkpoints that are used for fine-tuning). [PEFT](https://huggingface.co/docs/peft/index) is a library that allows you to do parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques. This means that rather than training the whole model, you can train a very small number of additional parameters, enabling much faster training with very little performance degradation. With PEFT, you can do low-rank adaptation (LoRA), prefix tuning, prompt tuning, and p-tuning.
```

---

> title: "Open-Source Text Generation & LLM Ecosystem in Hugging Face"

Reviewer 3: "in" doesn't sound right to me in this title. I would replace it with "at"
"Open-Source Text Generation & LLM Ecosystem at Hugging Face", or 
"Open-Source Text Generation & Hugging Face LLM Ecosystem"

thumbnail: /blog/assets/os_llms/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: merve
---

<h1>Open-Source Text Generation & LLM Ecosystem in Hugging Face</h1>

<!-- {blog_metadata} -->
<!-- {authors} -->

![image](assets/os_llms/thumbnail.png)

Text generation and conversational technologies have been around for ages. With the recent boom of text generation models like GPT-4 and open-source alternatives going mainstream, these technologies will be around, and integrated into everyday products. In this post, we will go through a brief background on how they work, the types of text generation models and the tools in Hugging Face ecosystem that enable building products using open-source LLMs, challenges, questions and how we respond to them.

> ## Small Background on Text Generation

Reviewer 3: I think this section can be reorganized to improve clarity and flow. First you introduce causal LM and mention challenges, then you talk about advantages of open-source, then back to challenges and their solution (rlhf), then fine-tuning, then back to causal vs masked. It feels like this section is jumping back and forth between topics. 

Perhaps, you could first talk about difference between causal and masked (with links to example models, and what cases they are good for), then maybe fine-tuning (when you would want to do that), then challenges of assistants and rlhf approach (with examples of causal language models fine-tuned on instruction), and finally talk about benefits of open-source models.

Author: @pcuenca @MKhalusova I've re-written introduction, added RedPajama and LLaMa. This blog post mainly aims for people who'd like to learn about the LLM ecosystem (and the tools available at HF), which mostly covers text generation models and doesn't dive into encoder-only models, so I didn't elaborate much on MLMs and fine-tuning.

![FLAN-T5 Illustration](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/flan_t5.png)

The model GPT-3 itself is a causal language model, and the models in the backend of the ChatGPT (which is the UI for GPT-series models) are fine-tuned on prompts that can consist of conversations or instructions through RLHF. It’s an important distinction to make between these models. On Hugging Face Hub, you can find both causal language models, text-to-text models, and causal language models fine-tuned on instruction (which we’ll give links to later in this blog post).

By the time this blog post is written, three of the largest causal language models with open-source licenses are [MPT-30B by MosaicML](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b), [XGen by Salesforce](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-base) and [Falcon by TII UAE](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b). All of them are available on Hugging Face Hub. 

Snippets to use these models are given in either the model repository, or the documentation page of that model type in Hugging Face.

## Licensing

> 

Reviewer 3: I think, if you restructure the previous section, this one will follow along really nicely.  The transition into licensing will be smoother IMHO.

Most of the available text generation models are either closed-source or the license limits commercial use. As of now, [MPT-30B](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b) and [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b) models are fully open-source, and have open-source friendly licenses (Apache 2.0) that allow commercial use. These models are causal language models. There are versions fine-tuned on various instruction datasets on Hugging Face Hub that come in various sizes depending on your needs.

> [MPT-30B-Chat](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-chat) has CC-BY-NC-SA license (for non-commercial use) and , [MPT-30B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct) has CC-BY-SA 3.0 that can be used commercially respectively. Falcon-7B-Instruct has Apache 2.0 license that allows commercial use. Another popular model is OpenAssistant, built on LLaMa model of Meta. LLaMa has a restrictive license and due to this, OpenAssistant checkpoints built on LLaMa don’t have fully open-source licenses, but there are other OpenAssistant models built on open-source models like [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/falcon) or [pythia](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/pythia) that can be used. [XGen fine-tuned on instruction](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-inst) has a restrictive license that only allows research use.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
[MPT-30B-Chat](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-chat), by Mosaic ML, uses the CC-BY-NC-SA license, which does not allow commercial use. However, [MPT-30B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/mosaicml/mpt-30b-instruct) uses CC-BY-SA 3.0, which can be used commercially.

[Falcon-40B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-40b-instruct) and  [Falcon-7B-Instruct](https://huggingface.co/tiiuae/falcon-7b-instruct) both use the Apache 2.0 license, so commercial use is also permitted. Another popular model is OpenAssistant, built on Meta's LLaMa model using a custom instruction-tuning dataset. Since the original LLaMa model can only be used for research, the OpenAssistant checkpoints built on LLaMa don’t have full open-source licenses. However, there are OpenAssistant models built on open-source models like [Falcon](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/falcon) or [pythia](https://huggingface.co/models?search=openassistant/pythia) that use permissive licenses.

Finally, the instruction-tuned [XGen model](https://huggingface.co/Salesforce/xgen-7b-8k-inst) only allows research use.
```

> Some of the existing instruction datasets are either crowd-sourced or use outputs of existing models (e.g., the models behind ChatGPT). ALPACA dataset created by Stanford is created through the outputs of models behind ChatGPT, which OpenAI prohibits using for training models. Moreover, there are various crowd-sourced instruction datasets with open-source licenses, like [oasst1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenAssistant/oasst1) (created by thousands of people voluntarily!) or [databricks/databricks-dolly-15k](https://huggingface.co/datasets/databricks/databricks-dolly-15k). Models fine-tuned on these datasets can be distributed.

Reviewer 3: I would say: if you're looking to fine-tune a model on an existing instruction dataset, you need to know how a dataset was compiled. [then talk about differences between permissive crowd-sourced datasets vs outputs from models that prohibit usage]. 
+Maybe a sentence or two on how to create your own? E.g. how Databricks created theirs.

Author: I feel like this is more of a compilation of the existing tools for when people want to use them, so how to create a dataset is a bit too much of a detail. Nevertheless, I'll add a link to the dataset card section of dolly's dataset.

> ### How can you use these models?

Reviewer 3: I would change the title to "How can you serve these models?" 
"Using" is very broad and can mean just sending a prompt, not necessarily concurrency and response times.

Author: Addressed!

> Response times and handling concurrent users remain a challenge for serving these models. For this, Hugging Face has released [text-generation-inference](https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference) (TGI) it’s an open-source serving solution for large language models, built with Rust, Python and gRPc.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Response time and latency for concurrent users are a big challenge for serving these large models. To tackle this problem, Hugging Face has released [text-generation-inference](https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference) (TGI), an open-source serving solution for large language models, built on Rust, Python and gRPc.
```

![Screenshot from HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/huggingchat_ui.png)

> TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/). HuggingChat is the chat UI for large language models. Currently, it has OpenAssistant on backend. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat, and enable the search feature for validated responses. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui) and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
TGI currently powers [HuggingChat](https://huggingface.co/chat/), Hugging FAce's chat UI for large language models. This service currently uses OpenAssistant as the backend model. You can chat as much as you want with HuggingChat, and enable the search feature for validated responses. You can also give feedback to each response for model authors to train better models. The UI of HuggingChat is also [open-sourced](https://github.com/huggingface/chat-ui), and we are working on more features for HuggingChat to allow more functions, like generating images inside the chat.
```

![HuggingChat Search](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/huggingchat_web.png)

> 

Reviewer 6: I think we should also mention that TGI is integrated in the huggingface hub / inference endpoints, so people can deploy their services easily like in https://huggingface.co/blog/inference-endpoints-llm

Author: Mentioned this, also added this link to further reads

> ### How to find the best model as of now?

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### How to find the best model?
```

Hugging Face hosts an LLM leaderboard [here](https://huggingface.co/spaces/HuggingFaceH4/open_llm_leaderboard). This leaderboard is created by people uploading models, and metrics that evaluate text generation task are calculated on Hugging Face’s clusters and later added to the leaderboard. If you can’t find the language or domain you’re looking for, you can filter them [here](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-generation&sort=downloads).

![Open LLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/os_llms/LLM_leaderboard.png)

### Models created with love by Hugging Face with BigScience and BigCode

> Hugging Face has two main large language models, [BLOOM](https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom) 🌸 and [StarCoder](https://huggingface.co/bigcode/starcoder) 🌟. StarCoder is a causal language model trained on code from GitHub (with 80+ programming languages 🤯), it’s not fine-tuned on instructions and thus, it serves more as a coding assistant to complete a given code, e.g., translate Python to C++, explain concepts (what’s recursion) or act as a terminal. You can try all of the StarCoder checkpoints [in this application](https://huggingface.co/spaces/bigcode/bigcode-playground). It also comes with a [VSCode extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=HuggingFace.huggingface-vscode).

Author: Mentioned about the science initiatives, you are right! thanks for the heads-up

BLOOM is a causal language model trained on 46 languages and 13 programming languages. It is the first open-source model to have more parameters than GPT-3. You can find available checkpoints in [BLOOM documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/model_doc/bloom).

### Parameter Efficient Fine Tuning (PEFT)

> If you’d like to fine-tune one of the existing large models on your own instruction dataset, it is nearly impossible to do so on consumer hardware and later deploy them (since the instruction models are same size as original checkpoints that are used for fine-tuning). [PEFT](https://github.com/huggingface/peft) is a library that allows you to fine-tune smaller part of the parameters for more efficiency. With PEFT, you can do low rank adaptation (LoRA), prefix tuning, prompt tuning and p-tuning.

Author: Addressed this.
